Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, Ricard Lops, and today I'm
joined by Doctor Paul Fagert. He's Distinguished professor Emeritus
of philosophy at the University of Waterloo, and today
we're talking about his latest book, Falsehoods Fly, Why
Misinformation Spreads and How to Stop It. So, Doctor
Faga, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
everyone.
Oh, thank you very much for having me.
So we're going to talk a lot about misinformation
here today, but I guess that before we get
into misinformation itself, it would be important for people
to understand a little bit better what we're talking
about when we talk about information itself. So what
do you think are the most important aspects of
information that people should know to then. Uh, HAVE
a better understanding of what misinformation is.
Yeah, that's exactly the right place to start because
you can't have an account of misinformation or disinformation
unless you have an account of what information is.
That's a surprisingly hard problem. There's an old mathematical
field called information theory. That was developed by telecommunication
scientists to describe signals going through, but it's not
useful for our purposes. Our purposes are to figure
out what's information for people, not just sort of
abstract probabilities. We need to have something that can
be true or false. So how does it go?
Well, one key word to go into it is
representation. A representation is something that stands for something
in the world. So when you get a representation,
it could be a sentence, or it could be
a picture, or it could be a A song,
these are all things that can stand for things
in the world. So that's what a representation is.
So, information should be meaningful. It should be representational,
it should stand for stuff. And now, of course,
if it can do that, if it can represent
the world, it can also misrepresent the world. And
that's where you get misinformation. You end up with
something that's false. So if something can be true
or false of the world or accurate or useful,
those are all things that go under the head
of, of, of good information, of real information. Then
you've got something that can really make a difference
in human communication.
But how exactly do we go about distinguishing information
from misinformation? I guess that's a very important question
to tackle here because many times people make claims,
usually based on conspiracy theories about how, what experts,
the media. The classify as misinformation, it's just what
some people, some elite out there, uh, establishes as
misinformation or decides is information or misinformation, right? So
how do we do it properly?
OK, the key question then is what's the difference
between information that's real and information which is misinformation,
which is one of three things here. I actually
got this from the US Surgeon General who gave
a good account of it. Uh, THE surgeon General
in the US, the top health official, is really
worried because he knows that there's vast amounts of
misinformation about health out there. Think about COVID, about
vaccines, and constant other things. But he came up
with a nice one. He said, misinformation is information
which is false, inaccurate, or misleading. Um, SO, the
key question there is accuracy. Does it actually reflect
what goes on in the world? So, my, my
account of information is correctly representing what's in the
world. Assume there's a world. This is already something
that people disagree about, but I think there's lots
of reasons to believe, yes, there is a real
world out there, and we can either get it
right or get it wrong. Information. That's done properly.
Real information gets it right. Misinformation gets it wrong.
It can be because it's got sentences that are
false or pictures that are, are inaccurate, or just
things that are misleading because they're a little bit
off and they give the wrong sense of what,
what's important. So, misinformation is information which is false,
inaccurate, or misleading, or often all three. And we
find loads of it, uh, in all the different
fields that I talk about in my book. You
find it in medical domains, you find it in
science, you find lots of it in politics, uh,
lots of it in arguments about um equality. And
the example that I used to sum it all
up about is in the Ukraine war, where the
Russians in particular use a lot of propaganda to
tell lies about Ukraine to try to justify it.
So real information about the Ukraine war is what
actually happened, who attacked who, what kinds of governments
do the different places have. That's real information because
it corresponds to reality. But when Vladimir Putin says
that their, their invasion is justified because the Ukrainian
government is run by Nazis, well, that's false. And
it's inaccurate and it's extremely misleading because it's being
used to justify an invasion for which there is
no justification.
And why should we worry about misinformation exactly, because,
for example, I've already talked with people on my
show who have been doing work on misinformation, how
it spreads on the internet, for example, and over
the course of almost all of those interviews, people
have told me. For example, that it's usually just
a small minority of people basically putting information out
on the internet and spreading it, and most people
do not fall for misinformation and even the ones
who fall for it, we have probably to look
a little bit into their political and social. AFFILIATIONS
to understand why they uh I mean tend to
believe in specific kinds of misinformation and so on
so uh I I mean there there are arguments
I guess for saying that perhaps sometimes we exaggerate
a little bit the social impact, the political and
social impact of misinformation, but. Uh, I mean, why
should we worry about it
exactly? Well, I don't know where the people were
saying this, but they're obviously not aware of what's
happening in the United States right now. There's a
high probability that the next president of the United
States is going to be Donald Trump, who is
a massive purveyor of misinformation. So he's still saying
that Biden stole the last election. He's still saying
that the economy is doing horrible. He's saying everything
is Biden's fault and that he was a perfect
leader. So, there's massive amounts of misinformation in everything
he says. Uh, EVEN while he was president, one
of the presses, I think it was the Washington
Post, tracked his statements, and they found 15,000 lies.
And these lies are enabling him to take control
of the world's most powerful country. Yeah, maybe he'll
get beaten and that would be good, but right
now, he's leading in the polls, and he's definitely
going to be the Republican candidate. So, anyone who
thinks that misinformation is a problem, is not a
problem, hasn't been paying attention to that, or consider
health. Right now, measles is spreading in Europe and
in Canada. Canada hasn't had cases of measles for
decades because there was general vaccination starting in the
60s. But because of misinformation about vaccines in general
and about the measles vaccine in particular, people are
starting to get sick again. There are still people
dying of COVID, despite the fact that there are
excellent uh vaccines available. So, the problem, the reason
we have to worry about misinformation is that people
get harmed, severely harmed by having fascist leaders in
power or by having diseases spread when they don't
need to, when there are good medical treatments available.
So, misinformation is just very, very, very harmful. Uh,
EVEN most recently, I mean, Putin is still justifying
his invasion of the Ukraine. What's the harm there?
Well, 30,000 Ukrainian soldiers, countless Ukrainian civilians have been
killed as a result of this invasion, which he
justifies by layers of misinformation, not only the claim
that Ukraine is run by Nazis, but also of
false historical theories about Ukraine is really part of
Russia. And so these false beliefs, this misinformation is
justifying the causation of immense amounts of harm to
human beings. So it's not just the fact that
there's a bunch of people talking nonsense on TikTok.
I mean that, that's not so important unless, but
when they start saying, what are the causes of
diseases, what's the political way to deal with the
current problems in society, then misinformation is causing real
harms. And that's why the first sentence of my
book is, misinformation kills, and it clearly does. Uh,
I give also examples from climate change. There are
already people who've died because of climate change, because
of heat waves and wildfires and things like that.
And all the information, the real information that we
get from government bodies, is that this problem is
gonna get worse and worse and worse, that there
were a few million people died from the COVID
um epidemic, but it's going to be Many more
million people are gonna die as climate change gets
worse, uh, in accord with the best scientific information.
So, it's not just that there's these little harms
and these little unfortunate things that happen because people
gossip on Twitter or TikTok or Instagram. People die
as a result of misinformation.
So let's get now a little bit into, before
we get into some of the examples you mentioned
there and explore them a little bit more like
the Ukraine war, scientific misinformation, medical misinformation, and so
on. In the book, you bring into the book
a particular framework that you call the theory of
information and misinformation or the AIMS because it stands
for acquisition, inference, memory, and spread, uh, could you
tell us a little bit about these four general
processes? What do they correspond to how and how
they work?
Sure. It was about 5 years ago, I realized
I needed a theory of information. It was because
of another project I was doing about energy and
the philosophy of mind, but I kept running across
information, and so I went to look and see
what are the current theories of information. And there's
still the old theory that I mentioned coming out
of telecommunications theory, uh, is around, but there wasn't
a good theory that would actually cover information. Here,
my background in philosophy of science was relevant. Along
with other philosophies of science, I've been arguing that
scientific theories, by and large, at least a lot
of the most important ones, are descriptions of mechanisms.
So, if you want to explain how the body
works, how life works, you look for mechanisms. You've
got the heart and the veins as part of
the Uh, cardiovascular system, you've got the breathing system,
you've got cell division. So you can explain all
of life by having a bunch of mechanisms in
mind. So what's a mechanism? Well, if you know
what a bicycle is, you've got a good example,
because with a bicycle, you've got the different parts,
you've got the handlebars and the frame, and the
wheels, and the crank and all those things. So
if you want to explain how a bicycle works,
it's the same as how you explain how the
body works. You identify mechanisms. So the question I
asked myself, what are the mechanisms of information? As
far as I know, no one's ever asked that
question because they were just sort of using it
informally as a kind of story, or they're relying
on Claude Shannon's old uh mathematical definition. But this
turned out to be really interesting, cause I started
to think about what makes information work in the
real world and these high-level problems that deal, that
matter to human beings. And I came up with
a total of 8 mechanisms that fit very nicely
under these 4 headings, cause 8 is too hard
to remember at once, so I boil it down
to AIMS. So, A is acquisition. So acquisition is
not just what you get from other people, like
that's what I mean call mean by spread. It's
acquisition from the world. So how do we acquire
information from the world? And that divides into two
parts, collecting and representing. So how do we collect
information from the world? Well, for a start, we
use our senses, we use our eyes and our
ears and our touch, and so on, or smell.
And so that's collecting, which is the key part
of acquisition. So that's the way to do it
right. And, obviously, we know how to do it
better now than people did 100,000 years ago, because
we not only use observation, we've also developed great
techniques in science to do systematic observations with lots
of people to use instruments. Instruments are wonderful because
you can measure things. You can use telescopes, microscopes,
rulers, X-ray machines. So we've got all these instruments.
And one of the most important things that we've
learned how to acquire information is experiments. You don't
just observe, you change the world and see what
happens. You do a manipulation. So you say, well,
if I change this a little bit, what's gonna
happen? And that's really great because that gets us
causal information. So, acquisition is really the first part
of getting real information if you do it right.
Unfortunately, we often don't do it right. The opposite
of, of this kind of acquisition, sometimes it could
be sloppy experiments, but what it is in a
lot of cases and what I've talked about, including
people like Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump, it's making
stuff up. And people don't understand the difference between
observing the world, experimenting on it, using instruments on
the one hand, that actually works, and making stuff
up, which doesn't work at all. I mean, because
that can be whatever you want to believe. So
that's the acquisition part. The second part is inference,
because you want to just rely on what you
observe, you want to make inferences and go beyond
that. We want scientific theories, we want to know
the causes of stuff. And science, again, has, and
philosophy have found really good ways to do this.
We can make inference to theories that are the
best explanations of the evidence. That's great. It's not
always guaranteed. Sometimes we get it wrong, but that's
just a terrific way of going. But, what goes
on with misinformation, it's very different. It's not this
kind of inference to the best explanation of the
best theory. It's very often, there's a bunch of
things that go wrong, but the most, the often
thing that goes awful thing that goes wrong is
called motivated reasoning. This is an idea that psychologists
have developed, that it covers cases where you believe
something, not because you have evidence for it, but
because you want it to be true. Uh, AND
we all do this, and you don't have to
be the, the, the awful leaders I mentioned to
do this. We all do it. We all have
things that we want to believe. We all want
to believe that we're healthy and we're gonna be
successful, and our, and our, and our children are
great, and we've got all these beliefs that we
want to believe. Well, they may have evidence for
them, but if we just do it on the
basis of motivated reasoning, we can get into real
trouble because that just becomes a very sophisticated kind
of wishful thinking. And so most of the views
that you find in conspiracy theories, in this lies
about science and medicine and these political lies, they're
just, it's just motivated reasoning. People believe it, not
because there's any evidence for it, but because they
want to believe it, because it fits with their
desires for power or financial gain. Uh, SO that's,
that's the difference at the inference part. OK, so
that's 2, that's acquisition and inference. The next one
is memory. Memory is really important because we can't
just make things up all along. We just can't
keep rediscovering things. We need to remember what we
learned. And so human memory is quite powerful, and
so we store the things that are important to
us. But memory is fallible, and we can do
something that's called motivated memory. And so instead of
memory, learning what's actually true of the world, we
can actually just sort of again make it up.
And so it goes into our memory, not because
it's warranted, but because it's, um, it just suits
our goals. Uh, THE fourth is spread. Uh, SPREAD
is what happens between people. So most of what
we learn, we learn not from directly interacting with
the world, it comes from other people. It could
come from the media, come from social media, from
talking to other people. And media can be incredibly
important if you get your information from reliable sources.
I have a set of TV, uh, news shows
and, and newspapers that I trust because I know
they've got a good track record. But where do
people get their spread of information today? Increasingly, it's
from social media. I was shocked the other day
to read that, uh, lots of young people, people
in their teens and early twenties, get their news
from TikTok. Well, TikTok is an astonishingly unreliable, uh,
source of information because anybody can do it. They
create these little catchy videos, and it's not curated
at all. The people who own TikTok don't care
about truth, they just care about eyeballs. They want
people to be engaged because then they can sell
ads. And that's true also for Instagram and Twitter,
now called X. Um, AND so the social media,
and it's true for Facebook. So this was actually
a drastic change in The spread of information, that
started only about 20 years ago when these became
available, because there used to be at least some
kind of gatekeeping that went on at the mostly
respectable newspapers and television programs, because they thought they
had an obligation, a journalistic obligation to tell the
truth, and so they would screen information. But with
social media, somebody has a crazy idea, and boom,
they can get it out to millions of other
people. Uh, AND this actually has been the single
busy, biggest cause for the dramatic increase of misinformation
that's available. It's because social media has changed spread.
That's my fourth category of, of mechanism. Social spread
from something where there's at least some constraints on
it to totally unconstrained, where people who are working
just with making stuff up and motivated reasoning. And
biased memories can then send it out to not
just thousands of other people, but literally millions of
other people. So that's why we've got this huge
amounts of misinformation about political conspiracies and vaccines and,
and so on. Uh, SO that's why spread is
the real, the 4th 1. So we need acquisition,
uh, inference, memory, and spread. And when those things
are done right, and in some areas, they are
done right by responsible journalists or by, or by
scientific research, well, that's great, we get real information.
But when they're done badly, as they are increasingly
today, then we get misinformation.
And what can we do exactly with this framework?
If I understand it correctly, we can both understand
how each specific type of misinformation, like for example,
scientific misinformation, political misinformation, works looking back at different
kinds of misinformation out there. Uh, AND how each
of these different processes played out and understand how
that particular kind of misinformation spread over time, but
we can also use it to tackle each specific
kind of misinformation and try to, uh, counter it.
OK, let, let me give you an analogy. I
think there's an analogy between this problem, which is
huge, and what goes on in medicine. So, what's
good health? Good health basically means that all the
mechanisms in your body are working. What's disease? Disease
is when they break down. Your heart stops beating
or your cells start dividing and become cancer. And
so, good health is the mechanisms are working. Disease
is when the mechanisms break down. But of course,
we have medicine. What does medicine do? It has
cures. Well, how does it do that? It intervenes
with the mechanisms to make things work. It fixes
your heart or it fixes your lungs, or it
stops the cell division. So what we need for
misinformation is something that's analogous. We need something that's
like a cure to fix the broken mechanisms. And
what I do is I, in the book is
identify a whole set of these, not ones that
I've invented myself, but I've compiled them and formulated
them and fit in a way that fits with
the mechanism account. So, I can give you a
bunch of different examples. Well, the first one is,
I have a willingness to identify the difference between
truth and falsity. When uh Rudy Giuliani was defending
Donald Trump, he said, well, truth is not truth.
I mean, first of all, if you throw truth
out, if you don't think there's a reality that
you're trying to get right, uh, then you're in
big problems. But the first thing is to recognize
that, yes, there's a world out there for medicine
and for science and for politics, and we're trying
to get it right. And you have to be
aware then that people are often saying things that
are false. So you have to have falsehood detectors
going. You also have a way of scrutinizing your
sources. Who's saying it? Do they have good sources?
So anything that Donald Trump says is likely to
be false because he just says whatever he wants
to suit his own needs. On the other hand,
there are some good sources like the newspapers or
the TV sources that I mentioned. Um, BUT then
for deeper purposes, there's other things we can bring
in. For many years, I taught critical thinking. Critical
thinking is a process where first of all, you
identify the thinking errors that people are making. Things
like motivated reasoning, which everyone succumbs to, but then
you try to counter that with good ways of
reasoning, such as evaluating theories based on the evidence.
So, critical thinking is there two steps. First of
all, what errors are people making in their thinking,
and secondly, how can we fix it? Another way
of doing this that other people have thought up
in a quite different role that I, that I
just became to appreciate is called motivational interviewing. It
actually makes belief changeless like critical thinking and more
like therapy. Uh, THIS was invented originally for people
who were being helped with addiction. So if somebody's
addicted to alcohol or to or to heroin, or
to some other drug, it's hard to give just
reason with them because they've got an addiction. Uh,
BUT motivational interviewing was invented as a sort of
therapeutic way of actually trying to understand people, have
empathy with them. Understand what's going on. Well, why
are you drinking so much or why is heroin
so important to you? And it actually has been
found to be effective. It's, it's sort of, it's
much nicer than critical thinking, which sounds kind of
like cold-hearted logic. This is being empathic and understanding
and helping. And actually, one of the most interesting
applications is it works with people who are vaccine
deniers, people who don't want to vaccinate their children.
Uh, AND so trying to give the pure scientific
argument doesn't work, but if you can talk to
these people, a lot of the people who are
vaccine deniers are actually really nice people. Their parents
are just caring about their children. Uh, AND they
want to do what's best for the children. Unfortunately,
through social media or, or lying politicians, they've gotten
misinformation. But if you empathize with them and understand
their worries about their children, how they want to
do the best thing, you can gradually nudge them
over, so they realize that vaccines is worthwhile. So
that's a technique called motivational interviewing. So there's a
whole battery of, of things, many of which have
been tested out by psychologists that can help you
to do this. Uh, I made up the word
pre-information by analogy to preventive medicine. So, in medicine,
it's well known that it's hard to cure people
once they've got a disease, but if you can
prevent the disease, that's really great. So curing cancer
is hard, but preventing cancer by making sure people
don't smoke or live in bad environments or eat
rotten food, and that, that's much more effective. So
I made up the term pre-information to cover a
whole set of ideas that psychologists have introduced that
are ways of keeping people from getting bad information
in the first place. Uh, ONE of them is
called, uh, prebunking. So debunking is correcting misinformation. Prebunking
means get in there and make sure people don't
get it in the first place. And so I
think that's a really nice technique that psychologists have,
have invented. Another one they call is inoculation. So,
you try to warn people. Uh, IT'S not working
with respect to Donald Trump, if, if, especially if
he's going to be the next president. But there
are millions and millions of people who haven't been
warned that you can't believe what he says because
he's just concerned with his own power and his
own fortune. But that's the kind of prebunking or
inoculation that might operate in some cases to help
people to get taken in. So there's a whole
set of different ways in which we can try
to correct misinformation or Even more effectively in some
cases, prevent it from arising in the first place.
So that's why this isn't hopeless. It's not just,
oh my God, we can throw up our hands
and realize there's just so much misinformation that it
can't work. Well, no, there are some things we
can do.
So you use the term cognitive error at a
certain point there. What counts as a cognitive error
and also in the book at a certain point
you distinguish between psychological and social mechanisms that drive
cognitive error. So what is the distinction? And why
is it important to establish that distinction?
Uh, OK, so a cognitive error is a pattern
of thinking that leads to falsehoods. Uh, AND here
we can really draw on, in the case of
psychology, decades of research, in the case of philosophy,
hundreds of years of research really going back to
Aristotle. So psychologist, psychologists call these biases, cognitive biases.
There's a large literature that began with Kahne and
Tversky. And it's really well documented mistakes that people
commonly make in their inferences. So there's these biases,
but even older is a tradition in philosophy called
fallacies. And so we know that there are patterns
of reasoning, but going back to Aristotle, people realize,
no, they're all fallacies that people make all the
time. And so, there are lists of literally hundreds
of these, maybe probably 50 biases, 50 fallacies, and
they're all well understood. So our cognitive error comes
from these fallacies. Let me just give you one
philosophical example, um, post hoc ergo hopter, ergo propter
hoc is the Latin for after this, therefore, because
of this. Sometimes one thing happens, another big thing
happens, and people think they're causally related. Well, sometimes
they are, but often they're not. That's a mistake
that people naturally make. So, psychology and philosophy have
documented people's tendency to fall into these kinds of
errors, which are kinds of thinking that leads to
mistakes. You might wonder, well, how could people be
prone to this when we're managing to survive in
the world? Well, surviving in the world doesn't take
that much thinking. You have to be able to
survive and reproduce, and it really doesn't take that
sophisticated thinking just to survive and reproduce. But now
we're living in this rich, complicated world and having
to deal with complicated situations, and the cognitive errors
really tend to draw us in. Uh, THAT list
from cognitive biases and And human and fallacies, philosophical
fallacies, misses out on what I've already mentioned, what
I think is the most important one, which is
motivated reasoning. This is where people believe something because
it suits their goals, it makes them happy. It's
not just wishful thinking. It means you, there's something
you want, and so you find reasons for it.
So this research was done by, uh, initially by
a psychologist named Ziva Kunda, who actually was my
late wife, and which is brilliant work. It's been
cited now 10,000 times. And the citation rate, even
though this work was done 30 years ago, is,
is just zooming 1000 times in the last year
or so, because people realize that this is the
basis. So you have to realize that everybody is
prone to motivated reasoning, thinking they're healthier than they
are or prone to be richer than they are.
And so I think that belongs as one of
the, the, the thinking errors that we have to
watch out for. Uh, THE other part of your
question was about social errors. Um, NOW, the social
error part connects up with the fact that most
of the information, as I said, we get from
other people, that's the spread part. And the problem
here is you have to worry about who you
trust. Uh, YOU shouldn't trust anybody on TikTok because
they're not screened. I mean, any, any 16 year
old can set up a TikTok account and declare
themselves a news source, and who knows where they
get their news. So, TikTok's utterly, uh, uh, unreliable
source, and that's gonna be true for a lot
of other social media. On the other hand, I've
got a list of newspapers that I think are
really pretty good, uh, and not perfect, but really
pretty good and a number of TV programs, TV
news shows like The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, uh, that
I, I think is, they're usually right. They're people
certainly who really care about getting things right. They're
not just caring about pushing a particular political agenda,
whereas you have other news sources in the US
you've got Fox News, you can't believe anything on
Fox News. They're just pushing their pro-Trump agenda. And,
and so they're as bad as social media or,
or religious texts. You've got to be able to
distinguish these ways and figure out who you can
trust. So, I've got a bunch of people who
I know have, are well informed, care about the
truth. If they tell me something, I'm gonna believe
it most of the time because they're, I think
they're reliable sources. So that's the social part. The
social part is acquire your information from sources you
know to be reliable, rather than from ones you've
got good reason to believe are highly unreliable.
And by the way, since you, you mentioned news
sources there, how do we go about establishing the
credibility of different news sources? What uh factors do
we look into exactly?
That's a really good question. It, I mean, it
takes a lot of time actually. You've got to
follow these sources for a while. Occasionally I'll encounter
a new news source, and uh I wonder, are
they reliable? So when I was doing the research,
for example, on the uh um. Conspiracies, uh, and,
and Russia, Ukraine. Suddenly I was running across news
sources like Russia.tv, uh, and, uh, well, first of
all, I knew that Russia was unreliable, and so
I had a hunch that Russia.tv, but then I
looked at some of their content, and you could
see they're just making things up that are, that
are announced by the Russian government. So it's probably
by association with good or bad people. But sometimes
you just have to follow it for a long
time. So I've got some of these newspaper sources.
One of my favorites is the British newspaper called
The Guardian, that I've been reading for many, many
years. And occasionally they do things that I think
are not quite right. But by and large, I've
been tracking what they say, what I get from
other sources that I think are reliable. And uh,
so you, you have to track places for, for
a long period of time and see the extent
to which they turn out to be right or
turn out to be wrong.
So just before we dive into some of the
examples of misinformation where you explore in the book
to illustrate all of what we've been talking about
here, just tell us a little bit more about
uh motivated reasoning because uh I would like to
understand here what's behind it, what drives motivated reasoning
cognitively, emotionally, and otherwise. Yeah,
that's a, that's a really deep question because People
used to think that the brain was sort of
divided up neatly, that you've got intelligence on the
one hand and emotion on the other part, and
you should be able to distinguish that. It goes
back to Plato, he said we should analyze the
human as being like, you've got a um a
charioteer and uh 3 horses, and you gotta kind
of keep them under control and keep cognition and
emotion. So, but, but, but that, now, now that
we have neuroscience, we know this isn't right at
all. If you look at the brain, You've got
cognitive areas and emotional areas, but they're intensely interconnected.
So, our intelligence isn't just our raw cognitive thinking
ability, that's, that's an old view that doesn't hold
up now. But it's, in fact, depends on a
really sophisticated interaction between cognition and motion, between our,
our cortex and our, our limbic system, which includes
areas like the amygdala. And the emotion is actually
really important because Emotions tell us what's important. It's
not just a question of what's true, it's what's
important, what's going to enable us to survive and
operate in the world. And so, the view of,
of thinking, I get this mostly from Antonio Damasio,
but there's loads of subsequent support for it, depends
on this really tight interaction between our cognitions and
our emotions. The problem is, there's no firewall. There's
no sharp division between cognition and emotion, or to
put it in the terms that economists might know,
there's no sharp division between probabilities and utilities. These
things should be completely separate, but they're not. They're
all interactive in our brain. And often this does
it well because we're figuring out what's in the
world, and we're figuring out what we need to
do. We have to avoid predators, we have to
find food, and so our emotions and cognitions work
quite well together, but they interact constantly. And sometimes
this gets us into trouble. So it gets into
trouble where instead of our cognitions depending on how
we're observing the world and what getting good information
sources, it gets tied in with our emotions. And
so you think, oh, I know what I want.
So, to take an extreme example, this happened to
a friend of mine, uh, he discovered a, a
lump in his armpit. It's oh, that's nothing. I'm
young, I'm healthy, this can't possibly be a problem.
Well, a year later, it finally got bad enough
that he got it checked out and turned out
to be melanoma, which obviously is serious, but all
of us have a tendency to be somewhat, uh,
uh, at least, at least I do, and lots
of other people do think, oh, that's nothing, that
little bump is nothing, but that's a motivated reason
cause that's what you want to believe, uh. So
this is something that happens because our cognitions and
our emotions are basically all tied together in the
brain. So, uh, that's, uh, that's, that's, so that's
why it's such a serious problem, and it means
that people who not only do it themselves, but
realize that they can manipulate other people can do
the same thing. So Donald Trump is always tying
into people's emotions. He's getting people afraid of immigrants,
uh, concerned about their cost of living, afraid of
the so-called liberal elites who he claims are running
their lives. And so he's just absolutely uh fiendish
about manipulating people's emotions, tapping into something which is
part of all of our thinking because our cognitions
and our emotions are so tightly interconnected. So that's
why motivated reasoning is so natural to all of
us because we don't have cognition in one part
of our brain and emotion in the other. They're
all interconnected with lots of going back and forth.
And so we all can be misled into motivated
reasoning as opposed to considering the evidence that's important
if we really care about our health or about
our political well-being.
So, in your book, you go through different kinds
of misinformation and the first one you tackle is
medical misinformation and a concrete example and a very
recent example of that is the COVID-19 pandemic. So,
in what ways does the framework We, we talked
about before the AIS or the AAIMS framework apply
here. Exactly,
yeah, I think it provides a good account both
of why there's so much terrific real information about
COVID-19 and other diseases and also why there's so
much misinformation. So let's do real information first. Uh,
I think that COVID-19 is one of the great
medical success stories. If you think of the fact
that the disease only showed up about a little
over 4 years ago, and almost immediately the cause
was discovered, they found the virus. And then within
a year, they found a vaccine that could uh
really diminish a lot, people either getting the disease
or the severity of the disease, uh, just a,
a fabulous success. So, the amounts of real information
that came about from observation and experiment and theorizing,
is just fabulous. So, that's a great success story
of real information coming up in COVID-19, and there's
lots of other diseases for which we've done that
as well. But what got me interested in misinformation,
actually, in the first place, is that 4 years
ago, at the same time as these wonderful advances
were being made, the amount of garbage being spread
about it was just enormous. People were making up
possible cures. They were saying, oh, we can just
use bleach. That's one that Donald Trump did on
television. Or uh they came up with different theories
about the causation. Also, this was just created in
a, in a, uh Uh, Chinese lab, well, it
might have been, but other people said it was,
no, it was created in an American lab, and
other people said, no, the causes are actually, um,
cell phone towers. And so people generated all sorts
of just completely bonkers theories about the origin, as
well as all sorts of completely bonkers theories about
which kinds of medicine could treat it. Uh, THERE'S
also, uh, early experiments within the next year or
two that show that the vaccines work really pretty
well with very minimal side effects, but other people
started telling stories about how they cause other problems
or how they don't really work. And so, COVID-19
was just a great case where we get terrific
real information by reliable methods at the same time
as various amounts of misinformation is being spread. So,
one question is, well, what are the miss, what
are, what are the motivations? Well, if you look
at a lot of the COVID-19 misinformation, it comes
from websites where people sell nutritional things. And they
basically say, just listen to us, we'll tell you
all the things that's wrong, and they're selling, they're
trying to get people to buy. Drugs or nutritional
supplements that don't work at all. Um, SO there's
a lot of lies being told just to sell
sorts of things. And some of the lies are
also being told for political purposes, because people didn't
want to have the government require that people get
vaccinated. They just wanted absolute freedom, and so they
would make up stuff to deter people. So, it
was just a really great study of both real
information coming by scientific means, but also misinformation coming
from lies and motivated reasoning and social media being
used as a source of information rather than good
journalistic sources or scientific journals.
So using your framework, is it possible for us
to identify what we could have done better in
order, in order to prevent the spread of misinformation
during the pandemic?
Well, it's hard to put it to work in
something quite that specific, but there's certainly lots of
more general things that need to be done. Uh,
PART of this in the sense of pre-information has
to start much earlier. Critical thinking isn't something you
can just sort of pull out of the hat
when you've got a real problem. It's something that
people should be taught. I mean, I taught at
the university level, but there are countries like Finland
that teach it at the high school level. I
think every high school student and possibly even some
elementary school should be taught, here's the difference between
good ways of getting information and the kinds of
mistakes that people naturally make and ways to correct
it. So I don't see any reason why critical
thinking shouldn't be taught in the high schools and
quite, quite possibly in the upper levels of grade
schools as as happens in Finland. So I think
you need education going way, way down to a
lower level. So it's not just a few university
students who take courses in critical thinking who get
exposed to this. So that's one thing that should
be there. But once you're in the throes, then
you can start to, as lots of people have,
try to make the distinction. What's the difference between
a scientific journal article and uh a post on
Twitter or X? Well, there's a huge difference, but
people don't understand that. They think that if Elon
Musk posts something on, well, he's, he's pretty, he's
pretty reputable. He's, he's, he's got $200 billion he
must know something. But, of course, he's just getting
his views from other people on Twitter and on,
on X. And so, you gotta know the difference
between reliable sources and not. So that's a big
part of it. Then once you're in the throes
of it, you can start to juxtapose, hey, those
people are saying things with no evidence, with no
good inferences, they're just making it up. Uh, AND
so that's the battle you have to fight.
Uh, SO do you think that, uh, what we
can learn about how misinformation originated and, and spread
during the COVID-19 pandemic could serve as an illustrative
example of how medical misinformation more generally, uh, gets
generated and spreads?
Sure, the problem is universal. Uh, PEOPLE take all
sorts of bogus cures. Uh, THEY read somewhere and
they, oh, that supplement works, it says, and so
they, they try it. I mean, there are obviously
lots of drugs that are effective, but there are
lots of things that are just a complete waste
of time. So, all across medicine, there are kinds
of treatments that are bogus. There are kinds of
drugs that don't actually work. How do we know
what's good or what's not? Well, the answer is
actually well established in medicine. You use clinical trials.
Clinical trials are very sophisticated kinds of experiments, where
if you want to know whether a drug works,
you take one group of people who get the
drug, and another group of people who get something
else, a placebo. But you don't just sort of
pick them or let them choose themselves, you use
random assignment. You randomly divide people into two different
conditions. And then, if you want to do it
really carefully, you make them blind and you blind
to who's getting what. So people don't know whether
they're getting the drug or the control condition. And
then, once you've done this and you've controlled for
all the different possible ways of confusion, Then you
will figure out, does it work or does it
not work? Well, the, the clinical trials have only
been around since about the 1940s, but it's a
really solid, well established way to figure out whether
a drug actually causes people to get better. So
medicine's got this very good way of proceeding, namely
controlled clinical trials. Sometimes other kinds of studies are
useful too. So we've got a great way of
doing this in medicine. So that's how we do
it. What we don't do is, oh, Joe took
that drug that he got off a mail order
and it made him happier. Well, that, that's not,
that's not science, that's not evidence, that's just an
anecdote. People often say, well, the plural of anecdote
is not. It's, it's not data. Data means you
do an experiment, you do a controlled experiment. So,
medicine knows how to do this well, and that's
how we get our information if we're doing it
right. And unfortunately, people are getting their information about
measles and vaccines and various drugs from social media,
or they're getting it from websites or just trying
to sell stuff, and so it's motivated reasoning and
misinformation. So we know how to do this right.
Medicine, contemporary medicine is very sophisticated, but if we
do it wrong, then we're gonna make people less
healthy rather than more healthy, which is what medicine
is supposed to do.
Another kind of misinformation that you cover in the
book is scientific misinformation, and you go through the
example of climate change. So I, I think this
is a very good example for us to understand
a little bit better what might, what could be
the consequences of. Being exposed to misinformation, so what
would you say are perhaps some of the biggest
misconceptions surrounding climate change and what are the worst
consequences we're having to deal with and will have
to deal with in the future?
Yeah, I think climate change illustrates um information, information
just as well as COVID-19 does. So is there
real information about climate change? Sure. That's what the
legions of scientists in the IPCC produced by the
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has been
doing for decades now. So we've got huge amounts
of good information. How's it done? It's done by
um measurements, it's done by observations, it's done by
instruments. So we've got huge amounts of information that's
also led to inferences. And so people have built
these climate models that allow us to make inferences
about what's likely to happen if global warming continues.
So, there are these 1000-page documents produced by the
IPCC that are very closely reasoned, full of, of
empirical information. That tell us what we should expect
and what we should worry about. So, there, real
information is, is all available, but we just need
to put it to work in making our decisions
about how to run our society. But what's the
difference? Well, on the other side, you've got lies
and huge amounts of motivated reasoning. Why is it
motivated reasoning? What's the motivation of people who are
climate change deniers? Well, it varies. A lot of
it though, comes from the oil companies. The oil
companies have been producing huge amounts of fossil fuels.
They, they get lots. They get billions of dollars
of profits out of it. They don't want to
be reined in because if there's less oil being
sold, less gasoline being used, their profits will be
hurt. And so that will make their companies less
profitable for the executives, it will make their powerless.
It will make their Their salaries less, and so
you'd have the, the, these companies that would be
hurt by control on the use of fossil fuels,
because obviously, the, the one way to get climate
change under control is to reduce the amount of
fossil fuels that are being used. So that's why
the companies are are biased. What about the politicians?
Well, there are a lot of politicians that are
basically in bed with the companies because that's where
they get their funding. So that's major oil companies
and the owners of the oil companies fund politicians
to say what they want. And so, the politicians
will say, oh, we don't want to restrict fossil
fuels, uh, and there's, so they make up stories
about what's going on. What are the stories that
make up, we say, oh, this is just to
try to get control over people and affect people's
freedom. Well, freedom is definitely an issue here, because
if you tell people, no, you can't have a
gas guzzling car and, and you have to pay
taxes for on your use of carbon, yeah, that
does limit people's freedom. I think it's a justified
one because it's in people's good. But there's some
politicians, the conservative politicians, both tend to be in
bed with the fossil fuel companies, but also they
like the idea of freedom, uh, as a sort
of abstraction, irrespective of whether it's in people's good,
good or not. So you have motivated reasoning on
the side of the oil companies and motivated reasoning
on the side of some politicians, and then they're
convinced that climate change isn't a problem, and so
they tell the lies and other people believe them.
So I wanted to ask you now, and I
guess that this would apply to a certain extent
to some of the misinformation going on uh in
social media and elsewhere surrounding climate change and also
anti some anti-vaccine or anti-vaxxer attitudes that people have.
Uh, HOW do you approach conspiracy theories through the
framework that you present in the book and how
do they relate to misinformation more generally?
OK, I mean, first of all, there are real
conspiracies. So the information part is, yes, I mean,
there actually are conspiracies in the world. I'll give
two examples. One is the conspiracies that the Roman
senators used to kill Julius Caesar. They got together
and said, let's kill Caesar, and they did. So
that's a real conspiracy. Much more recently, it's well
documented now that there were conspiracies around the attempt
to have an insurrection in the United States after
the last election. The huge up uh uproar that
took place in the invasion of the US Capitol,
that was a conspiracy. The Oath Keepers and the
Proud Boys, they planned it, and they led a
big attack that uh killed people and, uh, and
was an attempt to overthrow the government. So that's
a real conspiracy that's well documented. But what you
find a lot, especially among, uh, right-wing commentators is
conspiracies that are just made up. Um, SO I
use two examples. I use the QAnon conspiracy. There's
never any evidence for that. For a real conspiracy,
there's evidence. We have documents that indicated what the
Proud Boys were up to. We got emails, we
can know, see that in fact, they were getting
together to plan the insurrection. So we can use
observations and, um, and things like emails, letters to
indicate that something is a real conspiracy. But for
the fake conspiracies, there's no evidence. There's no evidence
that QAnon was any kind of reliable source and
that the things that were being said about a
supposed conspiracy among Democratic politicians who are pedophiles to
do all sorts of horrible things, that's just all
made up. And so we can use the difference
between real information and good observations versus making stuff
up to distinguish the difference between real conspiracies and
fake conspiracies. Probably the most nasty ongoing conspiracy is
called the Great Replacement theory. It's popular in, in
some parts of Europe as well as in the
United States. This is the idea that there's a
kind of left-wing plot to bring in. Non-white people
to take over, to take over the country. Uh,
THAT'S, you know, there's lots of good reasons for
immigration, but this is saying, well, no, this is
happening because there's, because there's just a conspiracy, but
they've never been able to document who's involved with
the conspiracy, how are they talking to each other,
what's the paper trail, what's the email trail? It's
just made up, uh, and people Believe it. Why
do they make, why do they believe it? It's
motivated reasoning. People are afraid of immigrants. They get
afraid. They think, oh, we've got to do something
to stop this. And so we've got to get
really good leaders, people like Donald Trump or the
right-wing leaders in Europe, and they're the ones that
will help us because they've got to stop the
Great Replacement. The Great Replacement was just made up.
It was a completely fictional conspiracy. So, it fits
perfectly under the account of misinformation that I gave
because how is it made up? Well, again, it's
motivated reasoning. People wanted power, people wanted to get
lots of followers. People were trying to convince people
that there were threats that weren't really there because
that enabled them to get more power. So that's
really greed for power as much as it is
greed for money. So greed fuels motivated reasoning, which
fuels bad communication, which, which fuels misinformation. And that
flies in the face of real information that we
can have about real conspiracies that do sometimes occur.
So the Ames theory fits just as perfectly with
conspiracy theories as it did with COVID and with
um climate change.
And you give the example of the great replacement
conspiracy theory there, and I guess another interesting aspect
here, and please correct me if I'm wrong, but
I would imagine that one interesting aspect of some
of these conspiracy theories is that they seem to
be recurrent. That is, they, they come and go,
they come into fashion, they go out of fashion
because the great replacement theory, if I remember correctly,
is much older than. The past, I don't know,
1015 years, I guess it's more than 100 years
old, at least it's from the time of eugenics
in the 20th century, Nazism and all of that.
Yeah, so it's an old one, but they're even
older ones. Take anti-Semitism. WHICH has been around for
at least 1000 years, the view that Jews are
in a conspiracy to take over the world, uh,
still, still very popular, uh, but entirely made up.
Um, SO the, uh, but it's been around for,
as I said, more than 1000 years.
So could you give us then an example of
political misinformation and what counts as political misinformation or
that you would classify as such?
Well, I've given some examples already, such as that
the 19, the 2020 American election was stolen. Uh,
SO Trump is always talking about elections being stolen.
So that's one way that it could be done.
Uh, BUT there are other things that can be
done to people that are, that are more subtle.
Um, THERE are lies told, for example, about the
economy. So, after COVID, uh, Western economies went through
big problems of inflation. And it was really bad.
I mean inflation was hitting 8, 10% a year,
and that was really causing problems because people who
live paycheck to paycheck and suddenly found their food
was costing considerably more. This was a really serious
problem for a lot of people. And the politicians
who want to accuse the government of constantly being
irresponsible, emphasize, oh, we still got inflation. But if
you actually look at the numbers in Canada, and
the United States and Europe, inflation has actually gotten
pretty much under control. It's down to maybe around
3% in most countries. And so people are still
feeling it because inflation was really great for a
few years. So it's in the interest of politicians
who want to Overturn the current government to say,
oh, the affordability is a huge problem. Well, it
is a problem, but it's a problem that in
fact has largely been gotten under control because the
inflation rate is down to reasonable levels. So it's
a case where the extent of the affordability problem,
and it's certainly the causes of it can be
lied about by politicians rather than The careful economists
who try to say, yeah, OK, we had, had
a big problem about coming out of COVID, but
now thanks to things like tightening of money and
higher interest rates, it looks like it's pretty much
under control. So that's another case where you get
political, um, poli political misinformation.
And in the book you also talk about misinformation
about inequality, but isn't it, isn't it a, a
sort of uh a kind of political misinformation or
not? Am I misunderstanding it here?
Oh, it, it's a lot of it has to
do with politics. It's certainly true because the governments
have to make decisions about, uh, fighting inequality. So
if someone says, for example, oh, we've got to
raise taxes on the rich so that we can
provide services to the poor, that's a political question.
But it's broader than that. It happens in other
areas too. Um, SO it happens, for example, in,
in education. Uh, EDUCATION, because these are sort of
political decisions because, but, but it's, it's coming up
in a lot of different ways. But just even
in ordinary life and think about, uh, um, relationships,
social relationships, romantic relationships, uh, sexist ideas, uh, involve
all sorts of kinds of inequalities, things that, uh,
take a really extreme example, if someone says, oh,
men should be in charge of their marriages because
they have bigger brains than women. OK, so men
should be in charge because they got bigger brains,
so they're smarter. A whole layers of, of, of
misinformation there that isn't political, it has to do
with biology. Uh, WHAT'S the misinformation? Well, actually, men
do have bigger brains than women, but that's only
because in women, the neurons are more densely connected,
and more densely packed in. They got the same
number of neurons, and by any objective measure, they're
just as smart as men, so that's one piece
of inequality, I'm sorry, one piece of inequality-based misinformation.
And it can be used to justify. Uh, DIFFERENT
kinds of, uh, of patriarchy that men should be
running because they've got better brains and other sort
of things that could go into that of all
sorts of stereotypes of women as being inferior in
other ways as being more emotional. It's all made
up stuff, not based on anything that's empirical about
the brain or coming from empirical psychology. So that's
a case where interpersonal relationships that don't necessarily involve
the government can be distorted by Misinformation about inequality.
And when it comes to the Russia-Ukraine ongoing conflict,
in what ways would you say misinformation might have
played a role here? I would imagine both in
the initiation of the conflict, but also in driving
the conflict, the conflict forward.
Well, war always involves lies. It's whoever's in a
war, they're always motivated to make things look good
for them and bad for the other. Uh, AND,
uh, Ukraine wasn't perfect about this. By and large,
I think they've been accurate reporting, but there were
some stories that came out of the early stage
of, of the war that made it, made them
sound really good. They had various kinds of heroic
things that supposedly happened that turned out not to
be well documented. But that, that was just minor
stuff. Whereas with Russia and the kinds of misinformation
that I mentioned earlier, things that they're claiming that
the Ukraine is run by Nazis or that they've
got this historical right to it. I mean, that's
much more serious. And, but on the, as things
go on, they've got various uh lies about who's
winning and who's losing. So misinformation is a big
problem in all wars, but in this case, given
It's clear that it was a just war on
the part of the Ukrainians defending themselves and an
unjust war on the part of the Russians who
invaded. There's really an asymmetry there, and so the
misinformation spread by Russia is far more serious.
Uh, SO let me ask you one question about
these different kinds of types or domains of misinformation
that you go through in the book. So we've
covered medical, scientific, political misinformation, misinformation about inequality and
specifically also the Russian-Ukraine conflict. There's also social misinformation,
but we'll leave that for the uh. Audience to
read about it in your book, but why exactly
do you distinguish between these different domains or kinds
of misinformation? I mean, are they to be understood
as completely separate, or how do we, how should
we think about it, about
them? Well, well, the important thing from my point
of view is that they all get explained by
my theory. My Ames theory with acquisition, inference, memory,
and spread applies perfectly well to all of them.
And so it gives a unified theory for all
these different ones. And of course there's other kinds
of misinformation as well that I didn't talk about,
but I think what's really cool from my point
of view is I've got a unifying theory that
not only explains how we get real information, but
also explains how misinformation arises, but also gives some
hints at what we can do to try to
prevent it and cure it. So that's what a
good theory does. How do things work when they
work well? How do they break, and how can
we fix it? So, I don't particularly care about
whether something falls under social or political or, or
romantic misinformation. The important thing is that all these
really rich aspects of human life can be explained
by a common theory of information and disinformation.
Earlier, uh, you mentioned ways of, uh, tackling misinformation
like for example, inoculation, prebunking. At this point in
time, what do we know about the effectiveness of
each of those, uh, measures, let's say, uh, I
mean, which one works best as far as we
know.
That's a wonderful question for which we don't really
have an answer yet. I mean, the, the analogous
medical question is, look, we got these different kinds
of drugs or antibiotics, uh, which work one works
best, so you gotta do a, a complicated clinical
trial. You get a whole bunch of people, some
people get one drug, other people get a different
one, other different kinds of treatment. This hasn't been
done. A bunch of these things have been tested
sort of individually. That is, there are experiments done
by good psychologists that show, yeah, sometimes prebunking works
and sometimes uh motivational interviewing works, sometimes critical thinking
works. But we haven't had these kinds of Giant
clinical trials that would tell us when you've got
misinformation spreading through a population of a lot of
people, exactly which of these techniques works best under
which circumstances. It would be wonderful to have that,
but these experiments are hard to do, and no
one's been able to do anything of that scale.
So I think that's a great question, and I'd
love to see that kind of research being done.
But by and large, all we can do now
is trial and error in, in particular situations and
see what's the thing to do. One thing I
didn't talk about as a, as a way of
operating in these situations, sometimes none of these psychological
things are going to work. Sometimes, basically, what you
need is political action. So, if you've got Vladimir
Putin spreading lies. If you've got Donald Trump spreading
lies, you're not going to convince Putin that he's
wrong, you're not going to convince Trump that he's
wrong. What you've got to do is have political
movements that can get these people out of power.
In the US it can be done by maturing
you don't vote for Donald Trump. In the Soviet
Union or in Russia, it's much harder because he's
a dictator. That's exactly where Trump wants to be
as well. But at least if you're in a
democratic country, you can make sure you vote for.
Leaders who have a commitment to truth, to have
a commitment to scientific ways of collecting evidence and
making their society better on the basis of these
reliable methods, rather than just relying on making stuff
up and motivated inference and communication by lies. So
it puts a big Onus on, in fact, individual
voters in these situations. Unfortunately, in, in Europe and
in, in North America, we, we do have the
electoral means to do this, and you have to
vote the liars out of power. That's the political
action side of trying to prefer information over real
information over misinformation. So it becomes a political question,
not just a cognitive or psychological one.
And do you think that content regulation or moderation
on social media should also be a tool in
our toolbox here?
Definitely, that's really badly needed. It's very strange the
way that social media kind of grew up without
any kind of control. In the US. It was
quite explicit. They passed a law that said that
the social media companies aren't responsible for the people
who post to them. Well, newspapers aren't like that.
If someone says in a public newspaper, a complete
lie, well, they can be charged with libel or
slander or things like that. Anyone can say anything
they want, but there needs to be tightening up
on the social media so that people can be
held responsible for what they've said. Uh, THERE'S some
movements to try to do that, but it's really
hard because these media companies are really powerful, they're
really rich. The European Union has actually been much
better at this than North America. They brought in
various ways of trying to control social media. One
of the advances in the European Union that I'm
really impressed by is they're bringing in new rules
for controlling what happens with generative AI, which is
a huge new source of, of misinformation. It was
only Uh, a little bit of a problem when
I wrote that book, but now that the book
is out, it's a huge problem because it's really
easy to generate not just words, but also pictures
using generative AI. It's just taken off in the
last year. So that's really dangerous. But the European
Union's thinking hard about this. Unfortunately. Um, Canada and
the US have been much slower. In the US
it's tricky because you've got all sorts of political
forces that don't want control by government. Uh, BUT
the European Union, I think, is doing a really
good job of, of looking at social media and
looking at generative AI as ways of potentially being
great sources of misinformation. So politics can work. Sometimes
you just have to work with leaders and voting
to get people into place who will work for
the sake of human needs rather than for the
greed of people who are wealthy and powerful.
And when it comes to generative AI and also
now with video audio images, deep fakes, for example,
I guess that it not only affects social, I,
I mean society in general and politics, but it
can also affect individual people if they have misinformation
in the form of video, audio, and so on
about them over. On the internet, right, and that
also counts as a form of misinformation,
right, yeah, but they're, but, but really directly harmful
where there's problems in Canadian high schools where, where
some of the students are creating, uh, porn videos
using pictures of their, there's, there's all these techniques
that are now available that can cause immense harm.
Obviously it's really dangerous for political purposes too because
it's very easy to create, uh. Pictures of people
saying things that they never said. I've got all
sorts of videos online, people could produce another video
with me saying the opposite of what I actually
believe. So, these are new sources of misinformation that
are just getting worse and worse as the technology
gets more and more advanced.
Are there ways by which you think, uh, individual
people, uh, I mean, something that they can do
in their daily lives, in their personal lives to
try to be less susceptible to misinformation?
You know, there are a lot of things that
people can do. Some of them are more sophisticated
like engaging in critical thinking, which requires a lot
of background. But something that I think is just
really basic. Ask, what is the source of that
information and what is the motivation of that source.
If you just ask that question, then you're gonna
be able to wonder, well, is there, are they
saying it because it's true, or because they're just
trying to trick me into buying some product from
them. So if, if people, instead of just automatically
getting something in social media and then passing it
on to other people, which people do all the
time, they get, they get a link, that's interesting,
I'll send it to my friends, but always stop
and think, stop and think, who's sending this? Is
it true? What's their motivation? If you just ask
yourself those three questions, that's already going to dramatically
slow down the spread of misinformation through particular communities.
So let me just ask you one last question
then. Uh, DO you think that there are ways
by which you, uh, this book connects to some
of your other work, like for example, your book,
The Cognitive Science of Science, or, or not?
You know, a lot of this comes out of
the work I've done in philosophy of science. So,
a lot of that work I've talked about, say
the difference between good evidence and, and making stuff
up, or the difference between, uh, evaluating theories carefully,
which is something that goes back to my PhD
dissertation, as opposed to just believing what you want.
And so, yes, my background in philosophy of science
definitely fed into this whole account of misinformation.
So the book is again Falsehoods Fly, Why Misinformation
Spreads and How to Stop It. I'm leaving a
link to it in the description box of the
interview. And Dr. Faygar, just before we go, apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find you and your work on
the internet?
By far the easiest is my main website is
Paulhagar.com. So, there you'll find information about my books,
copies of hundreds of articles. You can also find
a link to my blog post, if you want
a sort of non-technical introduction to my work. I've
got almost 170 blog posts there that cover some
of this in a really quite non-technical way that
people in general can understand. So, Go to Paulhagar.com
and that'll get you a a pointer to the
blogs as well.
Great, so thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you. Uh,
THANK you for asking great questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerruinnai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and Hal
Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel Cerri,
Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran, David
Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa.
Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt,
Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, and
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgius Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Janaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.